Welcome to a brand new episode of Keys
from Keyynotes. It has been a while
since I've put out one of these
episodes, but I promise you it's worth
the wait because in this episode I chat
with Sabia Sachi Senupta, who was the
winner, the first place winner at the
Toastmasters International Speech
Contest for 2025.
And if you are a Toastmasters member,
heck, even if you aren't a Toastmasters
member, you're gonna want to listen to
this interview all the way through
because Sabi breaks down the whole
process of what he went through to
deliver an awardwinning speech, a first
place speech. He talks about overcoming
challenges. He was sick for a few of the
contests and he overcame that. still
continued to advance and advance and
eventually took the title of the best
speech in the world in 2025.
What I loved about this conversation is
that beyond the contest, Sabi shares
some really good lessons and one of my
favorite is that you can't control
the uncontrollable.
He couldn't control what the judges are
going to think. He couldn't control what
the other contestants were going to do
in terms of their speeches. His attitude
was to have fun with the process, to
inject a little bit of humor and enjoy
the ride. I personally learned a ton
from this interview, and I know you'll
love it as well. Well, hi there and
welcome to Keys from Keynotes, an
interview series that taps into the
knowledge and expertise of some of the
world's greatest public speakers. And on
this episode, I am joined by the world's
greatest public speaker, or at least the
2025 world champion of public speaking
from Toast Masters, Sabia Sachi
Sangupta. Sabi didn't initially have
plans of even competing in this year's
Toastmasters International Speech
Contest, but his local club's vice
president of education signed him up for
the contest anyway. And thank goodness
he did because Sabby's first play speech
titled Just Nod combines humor,
effective body language, and an
incredibly motivational message. Sabi,
welcome to Keys from Keynotes.
Wow, thank you so much for this
beautiful introduction. I You took me
down memory lane about the club contest.
I was just thinking of conversation with
my vice president education.
Wow, that was quite it's been quite a
year, but thank you so much for
welcoming me. I'm really looking forward
to this chat.
>> I'm looking forward to it, too. And so,
like, let's go down memory lane because
I want to start there. How does that
happen? I mean, you get signed up
completely like you didn't even realize
it. What was the story there?
>> No. So, what happened was um I I I
compete every year. It's like my annual
ritual. I think the motivation to become
the world champion goes down every year
because you're like ah the new people
like all these things and um so this
year uh last year I did compete and I
was through to the area a division I
could not compete because I was in Bali.
So it was choice between being in a
beautiful beach in Bali or division
contest and I chose Bali. This year I
was um or 2020 uh 4 uh December I went
to Australia and then I was in India.
The winters are pretty terrible in
Europe so it's always nice to escape. Um
so the I landed in Amsterdam on a Sunday
and Wednesday was the competition. Now
while I was in India I was going
debating which should I compete, should
I not compete. Sometimes we don't have
enough competitors in the club. This
year I think we had five but I was like
nah I'm not sure if I want to compete um
because yeah I had to still like you
know I I've been doing a lot of speeches
but I've never really recorded my
pathways so it was they had to do all
these pre-work and everything. Uh so my
VP education really pushed me for it.
She's like, "You've done so many
speeches and you just don't, you know,
go to the base camp, get your things
right,
and then um compete." So, I didn't have
a speech idea till I landed uh in
Amsterdam. Once I did, I was like, "You
know what? I have a old speech about how
I got my driver's license. I'm going to
revamp that and, you know, do that." Uh,
so that's what I did. It was not I
didn't compete to win. I'll be honest. I
didn't even get placed first in my club
contest. I got second prize and I was
pretty happy with it. In fact, to be if
you brutally honest, I thought even I
didn't deserve second prize. I thought
uh the speaker after me, she was so
good. I I and that was the VP education
herself, Megan. I went to Megan. I said,
"Megan, you should have
gone ahead of me. I thought your speech
was incredible. You was amazing." She's
like, "Wow, now now that you've beaten
me, go back. You better do better job in
the next levels of competition."
[laughter] So, and uh yeah, that's how
it started at the club level.
>> Well, this is what I heard is that you
finished second in your club and so I
was going to ask you, does that mean
whoever won that competition like they
must have bragging rights? They beat the
world champion in the first speech in
the sense. Do you joke about that at
all?
>> Yeah. Yeah. In fact, um the person who
beat me was her name is Naomi. She is
the current president of our club. Um so
here is the thing. Our club is such a
supportive environment. Uh I did not
prepare for the club. I'll be very
honest about it. I just went to have fun
between the club and area. I did
prepare. What happened was uh I had a
very good friend of mine from Spain
visiting also Toast Masters Pablo and uh
he said, "You know what? I'm here. we're
going to practice the speech together.
Which on day one I didn't, day two I
didn't. Day three I didn't. And day four
he's like, "Okay, now before we go for
dinner, take your laptop out. We're
going to practice 1 hour, no phone, no
TV. We're going to practice." Like,
"Fine." So, we practiced and practiced.
And you know, when you're doing it,
you're enjoying it. You're also
learning, you're trying new things,
you're adding things. And I could see
the quality of the speech went quite up
from area from club to area. when I
competed in the area contest which is
one of the hardest contest in my opinion
because it's very dry it's a uh in the
morning people are sleepy on a Saturday
um I I I was I don't remember was the
fifth or sixth speaker out of eight
speakers um I remember after the speech
even before the results were out Naomi
the same girl who beat me walks up to me
and says sabs you're going to win this
contest and you're going to win the
semi-finals with this contest you're
going to the world championship ship you
this is a winning speech. I really
didn't believe her at that point. Like
at the area contest, there's like 100
steps before that, but she had some
conviction and yes, she she came second,
I came first and she kept telling me
this is a winning speech. You got this.
You're winning. You're winning. You're
winning. And it that that's the power of
our and you know funny thing is uh uh of
course it's a joke we we make and we
share but I've heard her speech or talk
about this competition so many times.
The only thing she talks about is how
much I prepared and how much proud she
is. That says a lot about our club and
our friendships there.
>> I love that supportive nature and that's
something that is really common I think
within Toast Masters. We were chatting a
little bit about this before we hit the
record button. When did you join Toast
Masters and what motivated you to do so?
>> My first time I uh arrived at a
Toastmasters meeting it was December
2010 uh in it was in a club called Utre
Toast Masters in uh Netherlands and I
officially became member I think in
March 2011. What motivated me? Well,
simple. I was here as to study in the
Netherlands. I uh came from India.
I missed uh friends. I missed uh having
uh familiarity. It's it's a total
unknown country with the weather, the
autumn depression and winter. Uh uh it
it it felt I I felt like I don't belong
here. It is not my place. I felt lonely.
I didn't have friends. Uh this is before
all the WhatsApps and uh Zoom calls. So
I couldn't I wasn't so much in touch
with my family and friends in India as
well. So
my brother told me like hey have you
ever heard of this thing called toast
masters? Why don't you go there? They're
in the neighborhood. So I went there for
the first time and
I just remember I felt I I that was
probably one of the happiest days in the
Netherlands in that year. I felt like
this is where I belong. This is my
tribe. And over the over the next months
I was regular. I was pretty much going
every meeting. Um I was one of the most
and you know within a two three months
you're familiar if you're regular you're
familiar with everybody. Uh we were
quite a small club back then, 20 25
people and yeah we were just all um uh
good friends and I still remember this
that uh on my graduation ceremony 2011
um I was scheduled to give a speech uh
and I decided to not uh cancel it. So I
got my certificate from the university.
I brought it to the club and I show
shared uh the story about how this
Toastmasters club has given me so much
that helped me survive this cold, this
mundane weather, mundane food and kept
me positive that helped me graduate with
good numbers. So I I just and I remember
why I I could have easily canceled it
the speech. The reason I wanted to do it
is because I wanted to be surrounded by
people who I feel are my people, my
tribe. And at that point in my life,
there were there were no one closer than
the Toastmasters friends. And probably
even now.
>> That's so cool. And I would imagine that
obviously this year in that first place
speech, that victory, probably the
highlight of your Toastmasters career so
far. I love that you touched on the
social aspect. When it comes to the
actual speaking skills and how you've
developed as a speaker, what do you
think is the biggest benefit you've
gotten from Toast Masters?
>> I think uh a lot of things I think to
structure. Um I have always been an
extrovert so I love talking but you know
to keep things compact uh not blabber. I
think that's something I've learned from
Toast Masters because you you have to
express whatever you want to express
within a certain amount of time. Uh it's
almost like there is imaginary red card
when you uh when you are dwelling on a
subject for too long. The other thing is
for example evaluations has really
taught me how to uh be more specific and
give uh adjectives that actually carry
weight and instead of using generic
words like good and all. That's
definitely second. The third is
everybody loves evaluation. Evaluation
does not mean only or feedback doesn't
mean only negative. Sometime telling
someone what they did well and why it is
so good. Uh I once went to a director of
our company and told him I loved his
speech and why I did the opening was
powerful.
I saw him melt. I was he was so touched
and happy in the end. Everybody likes
that kind of positive feedback. And the
fourth is definitely impromptu speaking.
I think um I didn't I was I wasn't born
in the Netherlands. I didn't know
anybody till I was 24. And yet today
people say I have a big network. I a lot
of people know me. Uh I think a huge
part of it is through table topics. You
know uh if you get one minute with
someone and you want to be memorable,
you want them to remember you. table
topics is you know keep speaking off the
cuff speaking impromptu is one way to
make yourself uh memorable you know uh
so that people remember you and you can
build a rapo camaraderie with them and
that comes very handy uh in crucial
junctions of life so huge help from
Toastmasters
>> I'm hoping to spend most of this
conversation diving into that incredible
run that you had finishing first place
and developing the speech for For those
who aren't aware of the process, what
does it take? Like what does that full
journey look like? I know you touched on
the initial story of how you competed at
the club level and then how you
practiced for the area. What is beyond
that to get to the final stage?
>> So depends on how big your uh district
is. District is uh for in Europe it's
Benooks France. That's my district 59.
So after the area you have the division.
I'm part of division C. after that
district uh district 59 and [snorts]
uh we used to be one big continental
Europe uh until 2013 then we split into
um we two parts so I was part of the
west south Europe so we had France
France Italy uh Netherlands Belgium um
Luxembourg um Greece uh Spain Portugal
so we were all fun so all the fun
parties and everything and now we France
district 59 um so you have to win the
district now since 2019 there is another
layer uh that is the quarterfinal in the
past it used to be a regional uh contest
so it just do masters above the district
it's split into I think 14 regions if
memory serves me well and uh and
[snorts] in first year I think there was
only one winner per region that went to
the semi-finals then they made two but
Now they want to have mix because they
so that if there are more deserving
candidates from one region um you know
they should go. So now they mix all the
districts in all the 140 districts into
one jar and break it into 14
quarterfinals. So I was part of
quarterfinal 11 um out of the 14
quarterfinals and there are two
contestants per quarterfinals that move
to the semi-finals to the to to the
convention which was held in
Philadelphia.
The quarterfinals are not really held uh
as a contest. They're not I don't have
to speak. Your district winning speech
gets circulated to judges and based on
which quarterfinal you're assigned,
you'll be also assigned judges. I have
no idea who checked my video or um I do
I I may have an idea who I was against
uh in the which districts were in my
quarterfinals but I don't know the
people by name and then on the 1st of
July we start 30th of June we started
receiving messages who qualified which
are who are the two people per
quarterfinal who are moving to the next
level. So yeah, that was um uh pretty uh
amazing uh email to get which I didn't
get on day one. I only got it on day
two. On 30th of June, I got email saying
I didn't get any email. So the
assumption was I didn't make it because
my name was also not on the website. So
up to 10 quarterfinals were published
and 11 12 13 14 were published on the
next day. uh that included both uh
included me, mass, Alan, none of us got
the emails on day one. So all three of
us assumed that we are not uh qualified
and next day we got the email which uh
first was un we didn't we didn't believe
and but it was really nice and then yeah
from 1st July you start the preparation
on the 21st of August we had a
semi-finals in Philadelphia
uh where you do the same speech that
you've been doing from the club level
or you can do a new speech as well but
if uh you need two speeches is one for
the semis, one for the finals and you
can choose which one you want to do in
the semis, which one you want to do on
the finals. It can't be the same speech
or a speech that you have previous
previously done in any semi-finals or
finals.
>> It can you clarify that it can't be the
same speech. They have to be two
different speeches.
>> Has to be two different speech. And if
you use a speech in any semifinals of
the world championship or finals, you
cannot use that speech again.
>> Right. Interesting.
>> So, for example, if I didn't win the
competition this year, my semi-final
speech donkey donkeys and final speech
just not I can never use it for
Toastmasters
uh contest. So, the tip here, this is
interesting because I'm learning this.
The takeaway for somebody who's thinking
of competing is sure you want to really
work on that one speech, but you almost
kind of want to work on two
simultaneously. Is that correct? And
it's very hard. In the past when there
was no quarterfinals, you already know
in May uh that you're going to the final
to the semi-finals. So you have May,
June, July to prepare. Now only on 1st
July, we got to know that I'm going to
the semi-finals. It in 43 days it is
hard to uh curve out a world
championship speech because it's it's I
had a lack of imagination. I could not
come up with a good speech idea right
like like forget the opening closing
everything just the story I couldn't
think of it so I had to go back in my
archives to find an old speech and I
found this one that I did in 2014 I gave
it a little bit of 2025
um what do you call that maturity and
presented it but I I I salute people who
write a fresh speech like I know Alan
did a fresh speech completely and uh I
salute that because I think it takes a
lot and it takes a lot to prepare a lot
to um
yeah uh create a new speech from scratch
few days before the finals.
>> I really want to unpack this idea of of
working and dissecting the speech making
it better and better and better. What
did that process look like for you? Were
there times where you made complete
changes to the way it was structured?
And a followup to that, Savvy, is is the
process of working on a speech for a
contest different than how you would
work on a speech for say a business
opportunity where you're invited to be a
speaker.
Um,
so yes, I did change a lot. So for the
semi-final speech, I didn't change a lot
because it was already a district-
winning speech. It's won the
quarterfinals and uh it didn't need a
lot of change. The one thing I do
consciously is for every level I take
out 20 to 30 seconds in the speech
because the more the audience, more the
laughter, uh more you have to give them
the reaction time to laugh. That means
you have higher chances of getting
disqualified. And uh so cutting down
when I send my semi-final speech to
people for giving me advice, the one
thing I ask, what do you think I can
take out? Don't tell me what I can add
because yes, I can add so many things to
make it funnier, but that's going to
cost me the contest. So that was the one
structural change I was doing. For the
final speech also, I didn't have the
closing till the last week. I had the
speech concept, the the body, but the
closing is what I was struggling with
the most. And I had like at least five,
six different types of combination of
closing uh before I zeroed down uh this
this this ending because I I I
personally don't like speeches that talk
about me me and sudden
dear toast masters, have you ever done
this? Um, and I wanted to make it a
little little different than that. Um,
so, uh, yeah, I didn't want to be too
overtly inspiring like I wanted to keep
the it lighthearted. Uh, so that's
definitely one, uh, the the change I I I
did in terms of corporate speech or a
business speech and toastmaster speech.
Yes, there is a huge difference because
uh, Toastmaster speech, I'm competing to
win. my main ambition is to uh you know
tick the boxes of judges to get the
audience laughing, entertain them.
Whereas when I'm doing a business uh
speech, when I'm hired as a corporate uh
uh keynote speaker, I'm there to inspire
or educate or teach them something new
that they don't know yet or give share
an idea with them. There I of course I
need to be entertaining, engaging so
it's fun. But if I'm fully entertaining
and I'm like somebody did an analysis on
my speech uh that I had 30 laughters and
three applauses that's like 20 every 20
or 15 seconds I had a laughter. If I
have that kind of laughter then I'm just
I'm I'm going more in the standup comedy
zone not in the inspiring uh speaker who
is sharing an idea. Uh so that's a
conscious uh line that needs to be kept
for everything. And I'm not against a
speech that you make people laugh. But
you need to know what's your purpose on
stage. If your purpose is to share an
idea, inspire or or educate, then you
have to think differently than you want
to think uh at a Toastmasters event.
Toastmasters event. I was an entertainer
and I went full on with the
entertainment questions. I would imagine
as you get further than contest, more
and more people who are trying to be
helpful, I'm sure, would have opinions
or ideas. How do you strike the balance?
Because I'm sure that some of that is
very valuable and probably led to you
creating the best speech possible, but I
would also imagine going too far down
that road could
overwhelm you perhaps or take away from
the speech. How did you strike that
balance? You know it's an interesting
thing because I've been part of many
such uh uh events where we have helped
uh the the people who are going to the
world championship and they have been
asked this question how we getting so
much feedback how you going to process
and uh one of them said well I know 90%
of it is just white noise I'm not going
to listen to it and I feel a bit shy and
reluctant to say that because um I don't
think it's white noise because it's
coming from a place of good heart. It is
uh sometimes it's disheartening,
sometimes it's someone says, "Oh, this
is not going to win." People have their
own perceptions and and things. So,
personally for me, I I took all the
advice. I listened to all the advice.
Not I didn't take I I listened to every
advice because I know it's coming from a
place to help me. But also to be makes
people aware that I will think about it.
I will reflect on it. I will see if it
fits it on fits or not. Um I I had two
mentors uh John Simmer and Adita
Maheshwaran. Uh for me it was very
helpful to have such experienced
speakers as my mentors because um a lot
of times I would get an idea like that.
I would run it by them and uh also being
a great speaker and mentors these these
are not people who will tell me this is
good this is not good. They will be like
let's try it out and see how it feels.
And while trying it out, it it gets
clearer that oh this is not going to
work, this is going to work. Um I'm not
always telling that you should only go
to experienced speakers for feedback
because sometimes you get great ideas,
get great lines from people who are not
toast masters or new toast masters
because they have a fresh perspective.
So uh we and that is really useful. So
yes, look for the fresh perspective but
also try it out to see what works, what
doesn't work. Um I personally avoid
people who are very forceful for their
with their ideas that oh you should try
this. No no no no you you have to keep
this because that kind of makes me a bit
nervous that hey
give me the choice to choose say yes or
no you don't overwhelm me with that
force. Um so generally I've kept I've um
um not reached out or asked help from
people like that. they if they come from
their own great but uh
I I I I that's that's the one thing I'm
very cautious about people who do not
give me space to think you know if I
want to take it or not so that would be
my coping mechanism great mentor uh
listen to everything and avoid people
who are very forceful for ideas
>> I understand when you landed in
Philadelphia you were sick or you had a
cough and I can only imagine
I I heard this in the Toastmasters
magazine perhaps in the conversation you
had with Mass and Allen. You spoke about
this and I can't imagine like even in
the best of health you probably still
have all sorts of nerves and you have
enough to worry about. What was that
feeling from your perspective knowing
that you had to deal with the sickness
and how did you overcome that hurdle?
>> You know funny thing is I was also sick
on the division contest. I was very sick
to the point I couldn't make it. But
then somebody said, "Listen, we had
three contestants, one cancelled. We
just two. Please show up otherwise it's
going to we don't even have a like you
know." So I somehow pulled myself. I was
coughing a lot. Somehow I managed to do
the speech for 7 minutes with all my
energy and then collapsed. But it was so
luckily there were not many contestants.
Uh so district uh the semi-finals it
same thing happened. I think it's also
the weather change. It's it's it's it
was also a lot of nerves. Um I was
extremely intimidated by the the
briefing that happened day before the
semi-finals. You are with 27 champion
speakers. Everyone looks so confident,
so suited up. So um like they're all
friendly. They're all nice. They're all
some of them have been there before.
Some are um so confident and you're like
what am I doing here? I don't belong
here. I'm going to run away. So that was
my in was going on in my head. Turns out
everybody else was feeling. I remember m
telling that sabi you look like the most
confident guy. You were joking and
laughing with everyone but I was doing
it out of sheer panic and nervousness
but turns out everybody was doing
something like that. But I remember I I
I think it's it's the silliest thing
right? We don't always think about these
things. Uh, I'm not used to air
conditioner here. I don't use a lot of
air conditioner in my home or at all. In
fact, it's generally cold. Philadelphia
was very warm and I kept the air
conditioner on uh in the room all the
time. Now, when you're living in a hotel
room for more than 2 days, I don't I
feel claustrophobic. [clears throat]
I feel [snorts] restless if you cannot
open the windows, if you uh if there's
no natural uh air or natural light
coming in. These are small things but
they actually impact the speaker and the
speech so much that uh to to to you know
to to stay in a space that you feel
creative that you feel good. Luckily our
room did have the option to open windows
and all. So opening windows having fresh
air really changed my mood my my health.
But things like this we don't think we
look for the cheapest option or the best
option. But again, hotel rooms are not
the most creative space, at least for
me. Uh, like I said, my president Naomi
was so supportive. Like, she was she was
she bought me medicines. She bought me
those uh vapor rubs so my voice gets
better. I was put on a tea diet. Um, and
uh, wine was prohibited from me
completely for the next days. Uh, that
was a good idea. And uh it was it was
but I remember waking up on the day of
semi-final I felt something good. I went
for a run in rainy it was raining crazy
but I still went for a run uh small run
5k but it was felt like I had something
going. So I think yeah those that that
definitely uh
I I hope I answered the question. It was
about the health. I completely forgot.
It's funny when you ask these question,
I just go back to that room in
Philadelphia and I just so much emotions
and stories come back. I lose track of
questions. I'm sorry for that.
>> Don't be sorry. That's what it's all
about is I think you're taking us with
you there in painting that picture. And
I'm curious about nerves. You mentioned
you've been a Toastmaster basically for
15 years, 14 15 years. And you're the
world champion of Toastmasters
International Speech Contest. Do you
still experience nerves and how do you
overcome those?
>> Absolutely. I think uh I think everybody
does. I think uh being nervous means
you're taking it seriously. I think uh
if you're not nervous, that means it's
you're taking it casually. At least
that's what I think of. Um I always say
this in my uh workshops and speeches.
You'll always be nervous, but you can
always control your nervous reaction.
That means you should know what's your
nervous reactions. like I speak fast or
make awkward movements. Uh those I've
been able to tame and most easy is have
a having a sense of detachment from the
outcome. I cannot influence I'm nervous
because I I care about what the judges
are going to do, what other contestants
might do. I cannot influence that. If
you can detach from the outcome, my
friend, nervousness and excitement are
the exact same emotion. Only thing is we
fear a different outcome. If you take
away the fear of outcome, nervousness
becomes excitement. And that's what
happened to me on the finals. That's why
when my name was announced, I felt so
excited that I even ran to the stage.
And there's a little jog I do. And it
was not intentional. These just
happened. The body ends up doing things
that you you you didn't even know you're
capable of doing.
>> I was going to ask you about that
moment. Let's maybe break that down even
a little bit further. So you've gone
through after you delivered the speech,
did you feel like you had a true chance
of winning in that moment? And then when
you heard your name, what was the
reaction?
So
you know uh uh
uh we have a you know the saying that
nobody remembers what you said, what you
did, but nobody will forget how someone
made you feel. And I will want to talk
about uh Mass Mas Mahhat Bin Mohammed.
Uh we were competing in the same
semi-finals and we were in the the
finals as well. Um
what an amazing guy. Uh semi-finals. He
was also wearing a red suit. I didn't
know that's his signature suit that he
wears for every I didn't know him before
that that he's been in the finals
before. I thought he's wearing red suit
so he's not going to wear the same in
the finals. Turns out he is. And I was
in red suit. We come face to face and my
worry is he will be he will hate me
like why are you wearing red suit
instant he comes and high fives with me
like hey we're twinning we're not only
twinning we're next to each other I'm
the second speaker he's the third
speaker the moment I'm done with my
speech and um I bow down to the audience
and I walk away I see at the entrance m
standing my ready to go and again I
don't fully remember what he did or what
he said because he's in his zone to
start his speech in 1 minute. But the
way he just smiled and high-fied at me
for me that was that felt like the
biggest validation that meant I gave a
good speech. Uh it's it's it it shows a
person with lot of character and
charisma that even in a moment when you
are stressed you are tense because
you're going to start speaking you
uplift another person. And that's what I
remember the most that I came back on
the seat. I sat down and I felt like
what a great guy that takes someone of a
special special personality to have such
generosity. That's that was the first
thought in my head while I was sitting
down. Again, I like I said, I don't
really remember what he did or said. He
said something and he high-fied and
smiled, but the way he made me feel
like, dude, what a speech you gave. like
you just had the room like you know uh
and and in in in my head I was like I
hope I can have such
generous outlook to towards the world
like mass has someday in my life. Uh so
that was really my first thought after I
was done with my speech uh more than my
own speech. Did I think I will win?
Winning and losing is very subjective.
Did I think I might be in top three?
Yes, I was incon I I felt in my heart I
was getting a lot of messages from all
over like oh your speech we loved it I
think you're going to win it's between
you and this it's it's you and this one
more speaker we're waiting for it u but
I I don't think for any of us eight of
us at that point anything mattered
because we were all in a zone also we
were laughing cheering supporting and
let me tell you a little story that uh
not not everybody knows. I may have
shared it before uh a day before the
briefing day before the contest on the
briefing uh we were in a boardroom we
had a mic on like a mic there was a
camera there were people following
procedures it was like nothing no
briefing we have seen before we were all
very excited nervous as well and then we
see Mark Brown walk in and uh we are all
like whoa Mark Brown he has letters for
us uh to wish all of us all personalized
letters for all of us to wish us all the
best for the finals and And then he says
he gives a little speech and he says uh
okay you know all the previous year
world champions are sitting in the front
row. You know that right? We didn't know
that. And we are we are here. You know
why? We are here to support you at any
point if you forget if you make a
mistake or you need energy or you need
anything look at us. We will give it to
you. We will cheer for you and get the
audience grooving. We are here to help
you. You know that moment changed I
think something for all of us. changed
the outlook of a competition for all of
us and I think we all did that that uh
during the contest while we were sitting
down cheering for each other rooting for
each other it's like we all wanted all
of us to succeed give we wanted all of
us to give the best that we have
prepared and learned and I think that's
what was going on um in it it it's a
it's a moment I I can't describe in
words where uh winning and losing felt
uh less of a consequence being there
with each other uh you know uh
supporting each other getting on stage
back holding each other's shoulder like
a train uh that's what we did all the
contestants together that felt way more
uh uh like a a point of success and
point of happiness than even the trophy
for I think at least for me
>> that's so cool I love that story one
thing you were talking about in your
interview I think it was with
Toastmasters magazine is the idea that
you you visualized before like you've
seen yourself winning the contest in
your mind like you played it that way.
How important is visualization when it
comes to public speaking?
>> I I I don't think I said I saw myself
win. I I I um on the day before
semi-finals I was like I said I was bit
sick and I'm very intimidated. I was
like I don't want to do this. I want to
go home. Why am I doing this? I'm making
so many mistakes. I'm not ready. So I
told Naomi, the same president, we were
walking back, can we go and see the
final stage because the semi-finals
happen in smaller rooms before
semi-finals and the final is in the
conventional room which is pretty big
and huge. So we decided to go. It's
across the street. We went there. Uh
they don't let us in because you know
they will let us in at a certain time.
And I said I'm a contestant. Can I
please at least see the stage? So they
opened the door and said but you cannot
enter. You have to see it from the
doorstep. And I remember as they opened
the door, I saw that big stage that
those blue uh curtains behind those
lights uh the room full of people. The
room was empty though, but I was like
the room going to be filled with people.
I was like, I want to be on that stage.
I see myself standing up there and
delivering a great speech and enjoying
myself.
And I had the same visual when I was
doing the briefing. Empty room. I'm
standing up there and I'm like I'm
loving it. I'm like this is going to be
fun. And they also ask you to do your um
all the movements to make sure the
microphone is fine, all the big steps
and big gestures. So I was practicing
the dance and everything. And I remember
Stefan who's going to be the contest
chair. He was like, "Uh, are you going
to actually do all of that on your in
your speech?" I'm like, "You're going to
find that out." I was just like, "I'm
going to have fun." So I did not
visualize winning. I visualized enjoying
and having fun on stage with my audience
and that's exactly what I did.
>> I really like that outlook that you have
about you can't control the outcome. You
can only control what you can do. So you
might as well make it as enjoyable as
good as possible. I think that flows
into the theme of the fact that your
speech just nod it really it leveraged
humor like it used strategic humor
throughout.
Speaking high level here, when it comes
to in general public speaking,
how powerful is humor? How is that
something that you've leveraged
throughout all of your speeches?
>> I I think for me humor is one thing that
always helped me. Uh I think I don't
know anything else other than making
people laugh. Um
I I I'm at my best and I enjoy the most
when I make people laugh. I think you
can deliver any form, any message, any
thought, any ideas uh through humor. I
think that's that's that's always been
my uh go-to. It's been my mass laws
hammer, something I've used when I need
to get out of a situation or to uh in
influence something or inspire. It's
always been my go-to and I think it's a
very very powerful thing. Uh I I did
have few advice against using a h like a
funny speech at the world championship.
Uh one of my best friend did tell me
like every year there is there are funny
speeches that compete but they don't
win. Um it's a known thing that you the
funny speeches don't win. And what I
realized later especially after talking
to FZY who was competing the year before
really had a funny speech he didn't win.
Turns out he was disqualified by 3
seconds. The risk of funny speech is
that the audience will laugh a lot and
the audience will really um enjoy
themselves and you have to give them the
time to enjoy because if you laugh if
you walk over or speak over their
laughter. Yeah. Then it then the purpose
of giving a funny speech is defeated.
Then you've not really given them the
experience they deserve. Like you don't
let them laugh.
But if you do let them laugh, that means
they're eating up on your time. So you
have to balance that and that is one
thing if you if you want to compete or
anybody wants to compete and have
funnier speech funny speech keep that in
mind that uh time is going to be of a
huge challenge. My speech in the morning
in my hotel room was timed at 4 4
minutes 50 seconds which uh in the
finals was around 7 minutes 15 seconds.
So that's the amount of laughter I got.
two more jokes and I could have been
disqualified. So, um that's so I was
really working very hard to keep it
short, keep it cut out jokes. I had to
cut down jokes that they were funny, but
I just knew this is already a lot. My
target was not to go above 5 minutes.
But then again, 1200 people laughing,
applauding, you never know when you're
going to get an applause. If you don't
let those applauses and sounds come
through in your speech, then the whole
purpose of humor is defeated. So, uh,
yeah, I think that's the balance that a
speaker should always keep in mind.
That's such good advice and I would
imagine this episode has been so
valuable, especially for anyone who's
part of Toast Masters, especially for
anyone who is thinking of competing in
perhaps the 2026 International Speech
Contest. And keeping that audience in
mind who may be watching or listening to
this episode, what is your advice?
You've already given a lot of good
pieces of advice, but if you had to say
one thing for somebody who's about to
enter the contest journey and is just
now thinking about what the speech is
going to be, what would be that advice
you'd share with them?
>> You know, the the few times and it's a
very personal advice. The few times when
I have done well in a international
speech contest is when I did not write a
a fresh speech. I have I used a speech
that I did in the club in a club
meeting. I have used an existing speech
and upgraded it, worked on it and
improved it and that always has helped
me instead of writing a fresh speech.
The problem with a fresh speech is that
sometimes we cannot think outside our
current scenario, current situation,
current uh because I'm I'm was in the
brink of leaving my secure job to go in
my building my own company. So when I
was writing my final speech all I could
think of things in those lines and that
was like you know you your brain is
fogged basically that's the only thing
in your mind and that happens at every
level. So
use something from an archive improve it
give it flip in the end like if I show
you my original speech the dream too far
to just nod you will see I've only
written 20% of that speech but I I use
that as a starting point. Uh so use an
existing speech as a starting point. Um
I think that that that then you can uh
add today's uh you know maturity and
ideas and see the magic happen.
>> That's such a good piece of advice.
So you win this you win get first place
in August. We're recording this in mid
December. What has life been like for
you since then? What types of speaking
opportunities have you been? Where have
you been in the world? Tell us a little
bit about life after winning. I think
it's been so the first thing that
happens to anybody who wins the world
championship within an hour well the
photographs and people making pictures
with you that happens immediately or in
interviews and everything and then as I
came back to my hotel I see suddenly I'm
part of a new group WhatsApp called
world champs and now I am in group world
group WhatsApp with all the previous
year world champions and they are
writing congratulations to me and
telling how much they like my speech
I almost collapsed like I had like
Katani, Dhanjaya, Verity, my car, Sirill
like all these people whose speeches I
have um Mark Brown people I've evaluated
Aran Laoy they are now I am their phone
numbers I'm like oh my god I feel like
the richest man on earth I have phone
numbers of all these legends u and and
it's it's it's it's it's a crazy crazy
uh crazy feeling to um you I next day I
bumped into at at the at the restaurant
bumped into Louisa Montova. She just
came and gave me a tight hug. Like I was
so like, "Oh my god." Like this is
unreal. This is happening. This um I
told Louisa how many times I've seen her
speech just to learn and everything.
Like it it it was it it is the most
unreal feeling to have uh be in a group
WhatsApp with these people. Like
seriously, that's that was the biggest
shock. I I'm still like processing it
every day. The second thing is of course
the travels. I've been to very fortunate
to be invited by a lot of countries in
the Gulf. Been to Dubai. I've been to
Saudi. I've been to Bahin. I'm flying to
Kuwait tomorrow. Uh I'm going to India.
I'm going to speak in India. I'm very
excited to uh go back to my home country
and also uh bring this energy there. Um
and next industry conference is season
is going to be also quite busy. But uh
it's it's it's great. I think what I
think uh what I what I feel people like
in me is [snorts]
uh and I hope I don't sound cocky when I
say this. Um I'm I'm trying to make
public speaking fun for everybody. It
it's not it's not a science that you
need to remember. It's not a maths that
you need to uh you know make a whole
calculation about. It's a it's a it's
it's a art. You need to just fall in
love with it. And uh my speech has been
a tribute to that. And uh since then all
my speeches workshop have been aimed at
that to make you fall in love with
public speaking. And I think that's why
I I I connect with a lot of people um
uh to transform this fear into love.
That's what I'm trying and hopefully do
more of that.
I had the chance to have a conversation
with Muhammad Katani and one thing he
mentioned was after winning the speech
contest that he tried not to I don't
know if he ever used that speech again
or at least limited and I I'm curious
for you you've clearly got this amazing
speech two speeches as we discussed the
one at the semi and the the
international
how about for you are you going to
continue to leverage these have you in
post speaking events is that what people
are asking asking for when you're going
to these various areas.
>> Well, I think most people ask how I
crafted the speech and the journey of
creating the speech and that's what uh
uh I I share. Uh I recently had an event
when somebody completely threw me off my
game and said we want to hear the speech
live and I'm like I I can't do it that
well anymore. You know, it was it was a
it was a motion I was in. You know,
something else was going on in my body
that day. I can't explain. So, no, I
haven't done that. that would be quite a
challenge you know I think uh to
recreate it uh the donkey would be
probably easier because like you know
every I've been with this sitting with
the speech for 5 months just not uh
because it's it's you know I I I can
tell you one thing like be there's a
part in the speech where I'm singing as
well where I'm doing a lot of like uh
loud gestures they are uncomfortable to
do I I'm not like you know I was also
feeling very shy to do that like the
singing part the like showtime or twist
and turn these are not that they don't
come very easily for me but in that day
something else was going on with me I
can't explain this like it was like
there was no shyness no hesitation no uh
held back energy I was just unleashing
the performer but I don't know if I can
recreate that as good as I did on Phil
in in Philadelphia but we'll see we'll
cross the bridge when we get there
>> as a last question Abby, obviously
there's been so much value for those who
are part of the Toastmasters
organization, but if there is anyone
either watching or listening to this
episode who's not with Toast Masters,
what is a piece of advice you'd have for
them for how they can level up their
speaking skills? And I know you
mentioned already the having fun with
it, which I think is a great piece of
advice. Is there anything additional
that you'd share with that audience?
Well, um,
doesn't matter what you're saying. If
you say it with energy and conviction,
it always works. I think there is no
substitute to energy. Uh, you have to
bring good energy. If you, as a speaker,
you're lethargic, laid-back, and boring.
You can't blame your audience. It's not
their job to listen. It's your job to
tell. So, uh, and it's a lowhanging
fruit energy. It's it's speaking with a
little enthusiasm. Speaking with a
little bit of that uh voice modulation
and be conscious with your energy so it
doesn't go like this. It it it is
regular. So I think that's definitely
one thing to keep your energy
uh throughout. And the second is join
Toast Masters. I think that's a it's
it's a playground. You can try different
things. You can try experiment different
things. I always say doing something new
in Toastmasters is like painting a
canvas. Uh if it's bad, you can throw it
away, but if it's good, you can use the
same skills to paint your wall. So join
here, Toast Masters.
>> Sabi, this has been an absolute honor to
get to chat with you for an hour. Thank
you so much for joining me on this
episode of Keys from Keynotes.
>> Thank you so much. It's been my pleasure
as well. Thank you so much.